Abstract—The application of stable diffusion models (SDMs)
in Internet of Things (IoT) image processing raises significant ethical concerns, particularly regarding model copyright
infringement and the dissemination of inappropriate artificial
intelligence (AI)-generated images. Model watermarking technology has proven effective for copyright verification and tracing
the source model of AI-generated content (AIGC). While initialnoise-modification-based watermarking can provide provable
security and achieve lossless embedding, existing methods rely
on denoising diffusion implicit model (DDIM) inversion for
watermark extraction, which suffer from inherent precision
limitations that compromise extraction accuracy. More critically,
most of the existing approaches of this type still rely on
access to the original or a compatible SDM during watermark
verification, which introduces considerable practical constraints
due to the model’s size and computational demands. To address
these limitations, an end-to-end flexible SDM watermarking
framework is proposed that replaces the DDIM inversion process
with a lightweight watermark extractor, thereby eliminating
the dependency on inversion in conventional provably secure
watermarking. Specifically, a universal watermark extractor
across SDM V1/V2 variants is designed based on a Transformer
and multilayer perceptron (MLP) framework, complemented by
fine-tuning a pretrained watermark decoder, to directly recover
watermark information from generated images. Experimental
results confirm that our watermarking method yields superior
performance in terms of fidelity and robustness. The lightweight
extractor offers additional advantages of low computational
cost and high transmission efficiency, providing an efficient and
practical solution for watermark extraction in SDM-generated
images.
Index Terms—Copyright protection, latent space, stable diffusion models (SDMs), watermark extraction model, watermarking.
I. INTRODUCTION
WITH the remarkable development of latent diffusion
models (LDMs) [1] in the domain of high-fidelity
image synthesis, users can conveniently operate various commercial LDMs, such as Imagen [2], stable diffusion models
(SDMs) [3], and DALLE-2 [4], to generate a vast number of
realistic images that are extensively spread on the Internet.
However, the misuse of SDMs by users has given rise to
Received 11 June 2025; revised 11 November 2025; accepted 15 December
2025. Date of publication 24 December 2025; date of current version 26 March
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62450067 and Grant 62302286, and in part
by the Natural Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2023YFF0905000. (Corresponding authors: Li Li; Xinpeng Zhang.)
The authors are with the School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China (e-mail: luohuixin@
shu.edu.cn; llichn@shu.edu.cn; xzhang@shu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3647881
several issues. Generated images are now at risk of being
stolen and spammed, leading to a blurring of the demarcation
between original and replicated works [5]. Additionally, some
malicious users are exploiting SDMs to generate illegal images
with malicious content to pursue illegal profits. Meanwhile,
with the increasing integration of SDMs into Internet of Things
(IoT) scenarios [6], such as transforming textual monitoring
data into visual representations for intuitive analysis, the
demand for content accountability becomes more critical. The
abuse and improper use of these carefully trained and optimized models not only harm the rights of model developers but
also exacerbate ethical concerns. Therefore, tagging generated
content is urgently needed for copyright authentication and
misuse prevention.
Digital watermarking serves as a robust technology for
copyright protection and source tracing, which is widely
applied in the realm of multimedia [7], [8]. By extracting
relevant watermark information embedded in images when
necessary, the owner can identify the illegal distribution and
use of images. In recent years, researchers have expanded
the application of digital watermarking technology to deep
learning models, with a particular focus on SDMs. As a result,
a variety of watermarking techniques have been successively
developed. These watermarking methods for diffusion models
are generally categorized into two main types: ownership
protection watermarking for artificial intelligence (AI) models
[9] and source tracing watermarking of AI-generated content (AIGC) [10], which is also called AIGC watermarking.
Ownership protection watermarking typically verifies the ownership of SDMs based on predefined input-output pairs. In
contrast, AIGC watermarking embeds watermark information
into all images produced by the model. This enables the extraction of watermark data from every generated image, thereby
facilitating the tracing of the image’s origin throughout its
dissemination. This article primarily focuses on the technology
of generated image traceability watermarking.
AIGC watermarking is initially implemented through post
hoc digital image watermarking techniques; however, the
watermarking module is proven to be easily removable due
to its independence from the SDMs. To address this limitation, various approaches have been investigated to integrate
watermarks into the model itself. The schemes are mainly
designed from two aspects: fine-tuning the crucial structure
of SDM and modifying the initial noise vector. The first kind
of method inserts the watermark into the crucial elements of
the image generation mechanism, such as variational autoen2327-4662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
LUO et al.: FLEXIBLE AND LIGHTWEIGHT WATERMARKING FRAMEWORK FOR SDMs 13951
coder (VAE) [11] and UNet [12]. As a typical example, the
StableSignature method [13] employed a simplified version
of HiDDeN as the watermark encoder–decoder during the
pretraining phase. Subsequently, the pretrained watermark
decoder was adopted to adjust the VAE decoder for watermark
embedding. Combined with the two-stage training strategy, the
watermark content was added to the UNet with a watermark
low-rank adaptation module to implement glass-box protection
[14]. The second design takes advantage of the property that
the denoising sampling procedure guided by the denoising
diffusion implicit model (DDIM) is approximately reversible
with a fixed random seed. The Tree-Ring scheme [15] was the
pioneer in this design angle, leveraging the invariance properties of the Fourier space to embed the watermark. Yet, the
initial noise vector failed to maintain a Gaussian distribution.
As a consequence, the overall arrangement of the generated
image deviated slightly from the original. On the basis of the
Tree-Ring scheme, two latter schemes introduced modified
sampling and deep learning methods, embedding the watermark while maintaining the Gaussian distribution. Yang et al.
[16] processed the watermark information into a latent variable
representation with the same distribution as the initial noise
vector to generate the denoised image. Lei et al. [17] explored
a unified representation between watermark information and
the initial latent vector to embed the watermark, which was
the first multibit watermarking scheme of this kind. Due to the
watermarked initial noise following a Gaussian distribution,
the visual quality of the corresponding watermarked image is
theoretically proven to be lossless. Furthermore, by directly
modifying the latent variable space, the training process of
watermark embedding can be significantly simplified, yielding
plug-and-play application outcomes. Therefore, this type of
watermarking algorithm, which modifies the initial noise, is
widely considered.
Despite the aforementioned advancements, initial-noisemodification-based watermarking still faces significant limitations. First, accurate watermark extraction necessitates the
restoration of the corresponding initial noise vector. However,
due to the intrinsic imprecision associated with the DDIM
inversion process and insufficient prior knowledge of the text
prompt, it fails to recover a latent vector that is entirely identical to the original. Second, successful watermark extraction
requires consistency between the SDM used for image generation and the one utilized for the watermark extraction, which
implies that the exact SDM must be provided to the regulatory
department to extract the watermark for verification. In this
way, the watermark extractor tends to be bulky, which poses
practical challenges and significantly restricts its deployment
flexibility. Moreover, the model owner may refuse to share the
original model’s parameters with the regulatory department
due to privacy concerns.
To overcome the limitations of this type of watermarking
scheme and enhance its real-world applicability, a universal
and lightweight watermark extractor module across SDM
V1/V2 variants based on the Transformer and multilayer
perceptron (MLP) architecture is presented, which can directly
recover the watermark information from the generated images
without relying on the DDIM inversion process. This design
decouples the watermark extraction process from the original
SDM, thereby making it significantly more flexible and
adaptable, especially in cases where the original SDM is
unavailable. Additionally, the watermark encoder and decoder
are pretrained together to embed and retrieve the watermark
within the latent space, and the watermark decoder is subsequently fine-tuned in conjunction with the trained watermark
extractor to further improve the watermark extraction performance. The primary contributions of this work are detailed in
the following.
1) Considering the initial-noise-modification-based watermarking strategy, a flexible and generalizable watermark
verification framework for SDM is introduced. Unlike
existing methods, the proposed method enables direct
watermark extraction from generated images without
requiring access to the original diffusion model used for
generation.
2) A universal watermark extractor module across SDM
V1/V2 variants is designed to realize the function of the
DDIM inversion process for recovering the watermarked
initial noise, facilitating subsequent watermark decoding. Built upon a lightweight Transformer and MLP
architecture, it effectively extracts embedded watermarks
with minimal computational overhead.
3) Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed
SDM watermarking scheme achieves high fidelity
in watermarked generated images, strong robustness
against attacks, and low computational cost, thereby
enhancing practicality and scalability for real-world
deployment scenarios.
The following sections of this article are organized as
follows. In Section I, the related work about diffusion models
and watermarking technologies is provided. The threat model
and the detailed proposed SDM watermarking scheme are
described in Section III. In Section IV, experimental results
are dwelled on. Finally, a conclusion is reached in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Diffusion Models
Diffusion models have surfaced as remarkable instruments
for producing high-quality images. Considering the difference
in the generation space, these models are categorized into two
types: pixel-space diffusion models [18], [19] and latent-space
diffusion models [20], [21]. The former synthesizes images
directly from a vector of sampled Gaussian noise in the pixel
domain. While the latter based on DDIM [22] is introduced
to enhance computational efficiency. In this model, the latent
features are produced from the Gaussian noise in a compressed
latent space, and then, these are decoded by a pretrained VAE
[23] to generate an image.
Based on supposing the ordinary differential equation process allows for reversal when the step size is limited in the
small state, namely xt−1 − xt ≈ xt+1 − xt
, the DDIM inversion
from xt
to xt+1 is followed as:
xt+1 =
p
α¯t+1 xˆ
t
0 +
p
1 − α¯t+1θ (xt) (1)
where ˆx
t
0
is the acquired image from the starting image x0
through the DDIM process and θ is the noise estimation
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
13952 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026
network. xt and xt+1 are the noised samples at the timestamps
t and t + 1, respectively. In this way, when an image x0 is
supplied along with an initial noise xT , SDM watermarking
methods based on the modification of the initial noise vector
can apply the DDIM inversion to obtain the watermarked
noise vector ˆxT , where ˆxT ≈ xT is required for extracting the
embedded watermark information.
SDM is a representative implementation of the LDM, which
is developed based on the extensive LAION-5B text–image
pairs dataset [24] and exhibits excellent and stable image
generation capability. In this article, SDMs are adopted to
evaluate the proposed watermarking scheme.
B. Watermarking for Digital Image
Digital image watermarking serves as a potent copyright
protection technique that entails the incorporation of a watermark into an image after its generation. Initially, traditional
digital image watermarking methods are designed in two distinct domains: spatial domain [25], [26] and transform domain
[27], [28]. Among them, the transform-based watermarking
schemes demonstrate greater robustness in defending against
some common attacks. Deep learning-based watermarking
methods take a step further by adding the special neural
network layers or noise layers when training both the watermark embedding and extraction modules [29], [30]. These
approaches significantly enhance their robustness against more
complex attacks. However, a significant and unavoidable drawback exists in these digital image watermarking technologies.
Illegal users can circumvent the use of these watermarking
techniques by simply refusing to embed the watermark into
the already generated images.
C. Watermarking for AIGC of SDMs
Currently, numerous studies have explored watermarking
techniques for images generated by diffusion models. One
mainstream approach involves modifying the training data
itself. Drawing on the watermark embedding concept of digital
image watermarking, Zhao et al. [31] embedded binary watermark information into the original image with a pretrained
watermark encoder and then employed the watermarked data
to train SDM to make the generated images watermarked. To
prevent the unauthorized use of private data, Wang et al. [32]
applied a signal function to inject the unique watermark
information into the protected image dataset to generate
watermarked outputs. Zhu et al. [33] designed a conditional
generative network that jointly learned visible watermarks
with the protected images to obtain adversarial watermarked
images. Liu et al. [34] injected the watermark into the key
pixels, which could affect the denoising ability of SDM
when generated images were distorted, thereby achieving
data protection capability. However, data-modification-based
watermarking methods often struggle with generalization and
fail to guarantee effectiveness on unseen datasets.
Another line of research focuses on adjusting the structure
of SDM, which primarily adheres to the two-stage framework.
At first, the watermark encoder and decoder are subjected
to pretraining. Subsequently, the watermark decoder is finetuned in conjunction with the VAE decoder, ensuring that the
generated images carry the watermark information. Min et al.
[35] modified the first layer of UNet and then embedded the
watermark during a special number of denoising iterations.
Kim et al. [36] proposed an approach where the watermark
is first converted into intermediate fingerprint through a
mapping network, followed by the integration via decoder
parameter modification to achieve watermark embedding.
Meng et al. [37] added a message coupler module between
the watermark encoder–decoder and the diffusion model
to balance watermark fidelity and image quality. However,
such algorithms demand an exceedingly large quantity of
computational resources during the training and fine-tuning
processes, posing significant barriers to their practical
implementation and scalability.
A more recent and flexible direction involves watermark
embedding in the latent space, modifying the initial noise
utilized for sampling. Following this, the watermarked initial
noise vector is obtained and subjected to a denoising procedure
to produce the watermarked image. Zhang et al. [38] performed the DDIM inversion on the original generated image
and then injected the watermark into the obtained inverse
initial noise vector. Besides, following the image generation
process, an image enhancement module was added to improve
perceptual quality. Liu et al. [39] proposed the mirror diffusion
model, where the watermark was determined by a specific set
of constraints and embedded by mapping the generated data
to the constraint set. To mark more watermark information,
Zhang et al. [40] utilized the convolutional neural network to
encode the watermark information into a latent representation,
which was fused with the latent variables and then decoded
via VAE to create the watermarked image. Arabi et al. [41]
employed a generated Fourier pattern to insert watermark
information and devised a two-stage detection framework for
extraction. The key advantage of modifying the initial noise
is that watermark embedding can be achieved in a plug-andplay format. This simplicity makes it an attractive option for
the generation of protected images.
III. PROPOSED SCHEME
In this section, the details of the designed SDM watermarking scheme are presented, which aims to safeguard the
copyright of SDM and trace the users who generate the
images. The threat model of the designed scheme is first
described in Section III-A. Then, Section III-B presents the
overview of the entire watermarking scheme. The corresponding detailed processes of the pretraining stage for watermark
encoder and decoder, and the fine-tuning stage watermark
embedding and watermark extracting are elaborated in Sections III-C and III-D, respectively.
A. Threat Model
The threat model is illustrated in Fig. 1, involving three crucial parties: the model owner R, the user S , and the regulatory
department V. The model owner R possesses an original SDM
Go. To manage and monitor the usage of SDM, R applies
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
LUO et al.: FLEXIBLE AND LIGHTWEIGHT WATERMARKING FRAMEWORK FOR SDMs 13953
Fig. 1. Threat model: the model owner allocates a unique watermark to each user and distributes watermarked SDMs. Given a text prompt, the user generates
a watermarked image, which may be attacked. The suspicious image is submitted to the regulatory department. Unlike previous methods requiring VAE
encoder and DDIM inversion, which the model owner may withhold submission for privacy, our approach pre-submits a pretrained watermark extractor. This
extractor retrieves the embedded watermark, enabling identification and traceability tasks via statistical tests.
a pre-defined watermarking algorithm to create and provide
specialized watermarked SDMs for different users. For each
user S i(i = 1, 2, . . . , M), the model owner R assigns a unique
SDM Gi(i = 1, 2, . . . , M) with the corresponding watermark
wi(i = 1, 2, . . . , M) embedded. The watermarking algorithm I
is meticulously crafted to integrate the watermark within the
generated images without compromising the original image
quality, ensuring that users remain oblivious to its presence.
For instance, given the text prompt, the image x generated by
user S M will contain this special watermark wM.
For the initial-noise-modification-based SDM watermarking
schemes, which are known for preserving image fidelity,
watermark extraction typically relies on the generative model
itself. This design necessitates that the regulatory department
V have access to the original SDM’s parameters to perform
the DDIM inverse process for watermark extraction. However,
this raises a fundamental privacy and trust dilemma in practical
deployment scenarios, where the model owner R is reluctant
to share proprietary model parameters to V. To address this, a
novel watermark verification framework is proposed, where
the model owner R does not retain or access user-specific
watermarked models during the verification phase. Instead, at
the practical deployment stage, R only pre-submits a pretrained
watermark extractor to V as the legitimate detection tool. This
enables independent verification while preserving the privacy
of the model owner’s proprietary models.
When a watermarked generated image x
0
is released on
the public platform for potentially illegal purposes, V can
utilize the pre-submitted watermark extractor to extract a
watermark wd from x
0
. Subsequently, V carries out two key
detection tasks: identification and traceability, without requiring any involvement from R. These two processes involve
different statistical tests of bit comparison, where the former
is tested between wd and the unique watermark wM, while
the latter is operated between wd and all the watermarks
wi(i = 1, 2, . . . , M) to find the most matching one. The details
of these tasks are as follows.
1) Identification: Judge whether this image is generated by
SDM based on the presence of the watermark.
2) Traceability: Point out which user generates this image
by the special watermarked SDM on the basis of the
exact watermark bit comparison.
This framework guarantees the model owner’s privacy, which
means that R never needs to disclose model parameters or
architectures to V during the verification stage.
It needs to be considered that the watermarked generated
image x may be different from the watermarked detection
image x
0 due to some possible purposeful or inadvertent
attacks, and people can nevertheless understand the contents of
detected images accurately. Additionally, the traceability task
needs a multibit watermark.
B. Overview
The overall procedure of the designed SDM watermarking
scheme is presented in Fig. 2, which consists of two ordered
parts: 1) the pretraining stage of watermark encoder and
decoder and 2) the fine-tuning stage of watermark embedding
and extraction. For the former part, watermark encoder E
is pretrained to transform the original watermark w into
the latent vector zT , serving as the initial noise input for
SDM. Concurrently, the watermark decoder D is pretrained
to retrieve the watermark w0 from zT . For the latter part,
following watermark injection via encoder E and general SDM
generation process, the watermark extraction unfolds in two
steps. The first step is to train the watermark extractor Dext
to restore the watermarked latent vector z
0
T
. The second step
is to fine-tune the pretrained watermark decoder D based on
the trained watermark extractor Dext, and then, the fine-tuned
watermark decoder Ddec is obtained. Finally, the extracted
watermark wd is adopted to verify the copyright of the model
and ensure user traceability. The pretraining stage lays the
foundation for accurate watermark encoding and decoding in
the latent space. Meanwhile, the fine-tuning stage refines the
watermark extraction process, ensuring high-performance and
dependable watermark retrieval.
C. Pretraining Stage for Watermark Encoder and Decoder
For an SDM, the input initial noise during image generation
typically follows a Gaussian distribution. However, if the
watermarked initial noise deviates from the original Gaussian
distribution, it will induce changes in the layout of watermarked generated images and compromise their generation
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
13954 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026
Fig. 2. Proposed SDM watermarking scheme. (a) In the pretraining stage, the watermark encoder and the watermark decoder are jointly trained. The encoder
can encode the original binary watermark into a latent vector, and the decoder can decode the latent vector back to the binary watermark. (b) In the finetuning stage for watermark embedding and extraction, the watermark extractor is trained to convert the watermarked image into a latent vector, and then, the
watermark decoder is fine-tuned to decode the obtained latent vector with the watermark extractor frozen.
quality. Therefore, maintaining the original distribution of the
input initial noise is essential for ensuring the image quality.
During the pretraining stage, the watermark encoder E and
the watermark decoder D are designed separately to generate
watermarked initial noise with a Gaussian distribution and
extract the embedded watermark information from it. The
training goal of E is to build a mapping from the watermark
information to the watermarked initial noise within a standard
Gaussian distribution, taking into account both the watermark
data and the area where the watermark is to be embedded.
Specifically, when the binary watermark information of the
user is fed into the encoder, it generates the watermarked
latent vector that follows a standard Gaussian distribution.
Since the initial noise vector is generated based on the
watermark, subsequent sampling and training processes do not
affect its distribution, thus preserving the generation quality of
watermarked images. The watermark decoder D is regarded as
the inverse operation of E, and its primary aim is to retrieve
the watermark from the watermarked latent vector.
When the n-bit random binary watermark w ∈ {0, 1}
n
,
representing the identity information of the user, is input
into E, a watermarked latent vector zT ∈ R
C×H×W is gotten.
Here, C stands for the value of channels, H stands for the
height value, and W stands for the width value within the
latent space. As shown in Fig. 3, E is composed of four
pairs of combination layers, containing a convolutional layer,
a batch normalization layer, and a ReLU layer. The following
are two separate linear layers to obtain the mean vector and the
variance vector, respectively. Finally, zT is derived through the
reparameterization operation on these two vectors. To calculate
the loss between the standard latent vector distribution and
the watermarked latent vector distribution, Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence is adopted, which can assess the deviation
of the obtained probability distribution from the expected
probability distribution. The normal distribution is represented
as q ∼ N(0, 1), and the watermarked latent vector zT follows
the distribution, denoted as p ∼ N(µ, σ2
). The corresponding
Fig. 3. Network structure of watermark encoder E, watermark decoder D,
and watermark extractor Dext.
distribution loss is given by the following equation:
Ld = KL (pkq) = −
1
2
×

2 logσ + 1 − σ
2 − µ
2

. (2)
To ensure that the encoded watermarked latent vector truly
conforms to a standard Gaussian distribution, the KL divergence loss in (2) is employed as a regularization term to
penalize deviations from N(0, 1). In practice, this encourages
the mean µ to approach zero and the variance σ
2
to approach
one for each latent dimension, thus aligning the watermarked
latent distribution with the noise prior required by the SDM.
Then, the watermarked latent vector zT is input into the
watermark decoder D. As presented in Fig. 3, D is made up
of a linear layer, four pairs of combined layers, consisting
of a transposed convolutional layer, a batch normalization
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
LUO et al.: FLEXIBLE AND LIGHTWEIGHT WATERMARKING FRAMEWORK FOR SDMs 13955
layer, and a ReLU layer, a convolutional layer, and a fully
connected layer, which is the function of sigmoid(·). Finally,
the watermark wo is reconstructed. The reconstruction loss Lr
is computed by leveraging the mean square error (mse) loss,
which is determined by comparing the original watermark w
with the reconstructed watermark wo, and the corresponding
equation is defined as follows:
Lr = MSE (wo,w) . (3)
In these two loss functions, Lr ensures the correct decoding
of watermark information, while Ld preserves the original
Gaussian distribution of the latent vector, thus maintaining the
fidelity of the watermarked images. The watermark encoder E
and decoder D are jointly trained by minimizing the following
total loss function:
Lw = λ1Ld + λ2Lr (4)
where λ1 and λ2 represent the proportional constant parameters, respectively. Therefore, the pretrained watermark encoder
E can embed watermark information into the latent vector that
approximately follows a standard Gaussian distribution. Meanwhile, the pretrained watermark decoder D can be considered
as the reverse operation of the encoder, serving the purpose
of watermark decoding.
D. Fine-Tuning Stage for Watermark Embedding and
Extraction
Based on the pretrained watermark encoder E and the
fixed text-to-image diffusion model G, whose parameters are
frozen, the original watermark w is transformed into the latent
vector zT . Through the iterative denoising process with the
UNet, the semantic information from the input text prompt
is also incorporated into zT , resulting in the latent vector zo.
Subsequently, zo is fed into VAE decoder of G, and then, the
generated image Iw is embedded with a watermark.
Following the insight of [37], our designed approach
embeds the watermarks into the initial latent space, thereby
achieving inherent robustness against common image processing attacks. In this manner, a dedicated distortion layer is no
longer required during the fine-tuning stage. There are two
steps that are integral to the watermark extraction process.
In the first step, a universal watermark extractor Dext across
SDM V1/V2 variants is trained. The trained extractor Dext can
retrieve the watermark feature from the watermarked image
Iw and get the watermarked latent vector z
0
T
. Dext accepts the
watermarked generated image Iw as the input. The core of
this step is to restore the similar latent variable as the original
watermarked latent vector zT , and Dext needs to achieve the
functions of the VAE encoder and DDIM inversion process.
This designed operation recovers watermark information from
the acquired image, allowing for ownership verification and
user traceability without relying on the original SDM modules.
The network structure of Dext is displayed in Fig. 3. Along
with a convolutional layer and a linear layer, Dext includes a
Transformer encoder with two layers and one head, an MLP
module consisting of a linear layer, a ReLU layer, and a linear
layer, and finally a convolution layer. In the training stage,
the watermark extractor’s parameters are initialized using
the default method and the corresponding training objective
function is formulated as follows:
Lext = MSE
z
0
T
,zT

(5)
The second step is to fine-tune the pretrained watermark
decoder D to enhance the ability to decode the concrete
watermark content from the extracted watermarked latent
vector z
∗
T when the parameters of Dext are frozen. Due to the
possible offsets in the watermark decoding region caused by
the watermark extractor module and possible image modifications, this step is to improve the accuracy of the watermark
decoding process and the robustness of the watermark decoder.
The corresponding training objective function is
Ldec = MSE (wd,w) . (6)
where wd is the decoded binary watermark content.
During the inference phase, when the user S M submits a
query, the random and specific binary watermark wM from
the watermark set W = {w1,w2, . . . ,wM} is linked to this user
exclusively. After the image Iw is generated based on the text
prompt and the watermarked latent vector zT encoded by E,
the final decoded watermark wd can be obtained through the
watermark extractor Dext and the watermark decoder Ddec.
To conduct a thorough evaluation of the effectiveness of
the proposed SDM watermarking scheme, two metrics are
adopted for two detection tasks. The true positive rate at a
0.01 false positive rate (TPR@0.01FPR) serves to precisely
measure the performance of the identification task. As for the
traceability task, bit accuracy (BitAcc) is selected. Specifically,
TPR@0.01FPR is defined as the identification accuracy using
a threshold τ, where the theoretical FPR is below 0.01. It
is assumed that the matching or mismatching of each bit
between the injected and extracted messages follows an i.i.d.
Bernoulli distribution with a parameter of 0.5. When the count
of matching bits between the decoder watermark wd and the
candidate watermark wj
is over the threshold τ, it indicates
that this image Iw contains a watermark and is generated by
the generative model. For example, the threshold for 48 bits is
set at 33 bits. BitAcc is the percentage of correctly extracted
bits. This generated image Iw is assigned to user S M, whose
watermark wM shows the highest similarity to wd and the
matching equation is defined as follows:
ts = arg maxj=1,...,M Fmat
wd,wj

(7)
where Fmat represents the number of matching bits.
Algorithm 1 shows the fine-tuning phase for watermark
embedding and extraction, where the loss function Lext is
employed to train Dext in the first step, and the loss function
Ldec is used to fine-tune the pretrained D to yield the fine-tuned
decoder Ddec in the second step.
IV. EXPERIMENT RESULTS AND ANALYSES
In this section, the performance of the proposed SDM
watermarking scheme is evaluated in light of various indicators. The detailed experiment setup is outlined in Section
Section IV-A. Section IV-B displays fidelity results across
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
13956 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026
Algorithm 1 Fine-Tuning Procedure for Watermark Embedding and Extraction
Inputs: The pre-trained watermark encoder E and decoder
D, number of training epochs epoch1
and epoch2
, a
pre-trained SDM Go, random original watermark w, text
prompt t, learning rate η, mini-batch size m and a constant
ε for Adam optimizer
Outputs: A trained watermark extractor Dext, a fine-tuned
watermark decoder Ddec
1: First step:
2: Initialize the parameters of Dext
3: for i = 0 : epoch1 do
4: A watermarked latent vector zT is obtained by E
based on w
5: A watermarked image Iw is generated by Go based
on zT and t
6: A latent vector z
0
T
is restored by Dext from the
watermarked image Iw
7: Compute loss: Lext = MSE(z
0
T
,zT )
8: Update parameters of Dext using Adam optimizer:
Dext ← Adam
∇D
1
m
Pm
k=1
L
k
ext, η, ε
9: end for
10: Return the trained extractor Dext
11: Second step:
12: Freeze the parameters of Dext and set the parameters of
D trainable
13: for j = 0 : epoch2 do
14: Same as lines 4-5
15: A latent vector z
∗
T
is restored by Dext from the
watermarked image Iw
16: The watermark wd is decoded by D from the latent
vector z
∗
T
17: Compute loss: Ldec = MSE(wd,w)
18: Update parameters of D using Adam optimizer:
D ← Adam
∇D
1
m
Pm
k=1
L
k
dec, η, ε
19: end for
20: Return the fine-tuned decoder Ddec
different datasets and watermark capacities, focusing on
semantic consistency and image quality. The evaluation on
latent distribution preservation is illustrated in Section IV-C.
Robustness assessments against various attacks are shown
in Section IV-D. Section IV-E analyzes the security of the
scheme. The performance of the watermark extractor in the
IoT deployment is presented in Section IV-F. In Section IV-G,
the comparative results are presented. Section IV-H further
explores the generalization of the method on the untrained
SDM versions, different inference steps, and diverse guidance
scales.
A. Experimental Setup
1) SDMs and Datasets: The pretrained text-to-image diffusion models are employed in the experiments, including four
kinds of versions: V1.4, V1.5, V2.0, and V2.1, which are
provided by HuggingFace. During the training phase, SDM
V2.1 and the dataset Stable-Diffusion-Prompts are adopted to
train the watermark extractor Dext and the watermark decoder
Fig. 4. Attacked watermarked generated images. (a) Brightness, factor = 3.
(b) Contrast, factor = 2. (c) Gaussian noise, µ1 = 0 and σ1 = 0.05. (d) JPEG
compression, QF = 50. (e) Median filter, k = 5. (f) Gaussian blur, k = 3.
(g) Resize, factor = 0.9. (h) BM3D denoising, sigma psd = 10.
Ddec. DPMSolver is used for sampling with a step count of
25. In the inference phase, SDM V1.4, V1.5, V2.0, and V2.1
are directly used to evaluate the generality of the watermarking
scheme. The test datasets consist of Stable-Diffusion-Prompts,
MS-COCO 2017, and Diffusion DB, which are also suitable
for evaluating the performance of the watermarking scheme.
What is more, 1000 prompts are randomly selected and tested
from the corresponding datasets.
2) Attacks: To assess the robustness of this watermarking
method, we evaluate it against eight representative traditional
image processing attacks. These attacks target the image
content, simulating common, unintentional postprocessing
manipulations. The resulting attacked watermarked images are
depicted in Fig. 4. The specific attacks with fixed degrees are
as follows.
1) Adjustments in brightness with a factor of 3.
2) Adjustments in contrast with a factor of 2.
3) Gaussian noise with a standard deviation of 0.05.
4) JPEG compression with a quality factor of 50.
5) Median filter with a kernel size of 5.
6) Gaussian blur with a kernel size of 3.
7) Resize with a scaling factor of 0.9.
8) BM3D denoising algorithm with peak signal-to-noise
ratio standard deviation of 10.
Robustness experiments are also conducted on the watermarked images after different intensity image processing
attacks. What is more, to provide a more comprehensive evaluation, more advanced attacks are tested, including generative
attacks targeting the embedded watermark and model editing
attacks targeting the generative model itself.
3) Evaluation Metrics: To examine the impact of watermark embedding on the generated images, the fidelity of
these images is imperative to assess, including image quality and semantic consistency. For the first purpose, one
reference-based metric, Frechet inception distance (FID), and ´
two no-reference metrics, the natural image quality evaluator
(NIQE) score [42] and the perception-based image quality
evaluator (PIQE) score [43], are employed. FID measures the
distribution divergence between 1000 nonwatermarked images
and 1000 watermarked ones, both generated using the same
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
LUO et al.: FLEXIBLE AND LIGHTWEIGHT WATERMARKING FRAMEWORK FOR SDMs 13957
TABLE I
EVALUATION ON SEMANTIC CONSISTENCY AND IMAGE QUALITY, AND
WATERMARK EXTRACTION PERFORMANCE WITHOUT ATTACKS
prompts sourced from three datasets. NIQE and PIQE evaluate
perceptual quality based on natural image statistics and human
vision models, respectively. Image quality is evaluated on the
watermarked images that are not subjected to any attacks.
To evaluate semantic consistency, the contrastive languageimage pretraining (CLIP) metric [44] is utilized. This metric
evaluates the alignment between the watermarked images and
the text prompt, thereby quantifying the effect of watermark
embedding on the generative fidelity of the SDM. For an
effective watermarked SDM, the generated images need to
maintain a high degree of consistency with the input semantic
information, namely the text prompt. Furthermore, to test the
corresponding capability in ownership identification and user
traceability tasks, TPR@0.01FPR and BitAcc are adopted,
respectively, both computed based on the decoded watermark
information.
4) Experiment Settings: All the experiments are carried out
with the PyTorch framework, and the selected equipment is a
single RTX 3090 GPU. The size of the Gaussian noise vector
is 4 × 64 × 64, and the size of the generated image is 3×
512 × 512. In the training phase, the watermark extractor Dext
and the watermark decoder Ddec are trained using the Adam
optimizer with a learning rate of 1e−5
and a batch size of 2.
Both λ1 and λ2 are set to 1.
B. Fidelity Evaluation on Semantic Consistency and Image
Quality
In Table I, the fidelity of the proposed watermarking scheme
on image quality and semantic consistency is presented across
three datasets and three watermark capacities. All the experiments are conducted on the SDM V2.1 with 25 inference steps
at the guidance scale of 7.5. It is observed that increasing the
watermark capacity does not lead to any notable changes in
CLIP, FID, PIQE, and NIQE scores within the same dataset.
Specifically, for the results on the Stable-Diffusion-Prompts
dataset, FID values are approximately 25, PIQE values are
approximately 30, and NIQE values are approximately 5.
These findings mean that the generated images perform well
in image quality, even if the watermark is embedded. What
is more, CLIP values are higher than 0.3500, denoting strong
semantic consistency between the watermarked images and
TABLE II
EVALUATION ON LATENT DISTRIBUTION PRESERVATION
their corresponding input text prompts. These observations
suggest the designed watermark embedding strategy does not
significantly modify the original SDM, which can be inferred
to mean the fidelity of the scheme remains well. Although
the model is trained on the Stable-Diffusion-Prompts dataset,
its performance exhibits only a slight decline when evaluated
on unseen datasets such as MS-COCO 2017 and Diffusion
DB. This further demonstrates the generalization ability of the
designed watermarking scheme across different datasets.
C. Evaluation on Latent Distribution Preservation
To assess whether the watermarked initial vector aligns
with the standard Gaussian distribution, a collection of 5000
initial latent vectors embedded with a fixed 48-bit watermark
is generated with the watermark embedding method. The
global mean and the standard deviation of these watermarked
latent vectors are computed, and three widely used normality
tests are performed: the D’Agostino’s K-squared test, the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) test, and the Jarque–Bera test.
Specifically, D’Agostino’s K-squared and Jarque–Bera tests
evaluate skewness and kurtosis, and the KS test measures the
maximum deviation between empirical and theoretical cumulative distributions. As shown in Table II, the statistical analysis
demonstrates that the watermarked latent vectors closely follow a standard Gaussian distribution. In particular, the global
mean and standard deviation are nearly ideal, and the majority
of latent dimensions pass three standard normality tests. Moreover, the distance-based metric, Wasserstein distance, indicates
extremely high distributional similarity. Overall, these findings
provide strong evidence that the pretrained watermark encoder
successfully embeds watermark information while preserving
the Gaussian property of the initial latent vectors, thereby
maintaining the quality of generated images.
D. Robustness Evaluation Against Various Attacks
Based on the obtained extracted watermark information
from the watermarked generated images without suffering
attacks, Table I displays the corresponding TPR@0.01FPR
values, along with BitAcc values. The TPR@0.01FPR value
is sufficiently high at 0.999, indicating that the quality of
the decoded watermark information is excellent and can be
used to distinguish between watermarked generated images
and nonwatermarked images to verify the ownership of SDM.
What is more, the corresponding BitAcc value is 0.8125 when
the validation dataset is the Stable-Diffusion-Prompts dataset
and the watermark capacity is 48-bit. This extraction quality
of the embedded binary watermark is sufficient to achieve user
traceability, illustrating that the jointly designed watermark
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
13958 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026
Fig. 5. BitAcc and TPR@0.01FPR values of the designed watermarking scheme on three kinds of datasets (data 1: Stable-Diffusion-Prompts; data 2:
MS-COCO 2017; data 3: diffusion DB) under different degrees of image processing attacks. (a) Brightness adjustment. (b) Contrast adjustment. (c) Gaussian
noise. (d) Median filter. (e) JPEG compression. (f) Gaussian blur. (g) BM3D denoising. (h) Resize.
TABLE III
ROBUSTNESS EVALUATION AGAINST FIXED DEGREE IMAGE PROCESSING ATTACKS (BITACC/TPR@0.01FPR)
extractor and decoder perform effectively without the DDIM
inversion process.
Taking into account the fixed-degree image processing
attacks depicted in Fig. 4, the corresponding watermark
extraction performance with a 48-bit watermark is shown
in Table III. It can be observed that the reductions in the
average BitAcc and TPR@0.01FPR values under different
validation datasets are minor and remain within an acceptable
range. Specifically, when the dataset is Stable-DiffusionPrompts, the former decreased by approximately 0.04, while
the latter decreased by almost 0.07. The overall results mean
that the watermarked generated images can defend against
such attacks and can reliably support both model ownership
verification and user traceability. Furthermore, the robustness
of the designed SDM watermarking scheme under varying
degrees of image processing attacks is further analyzed. The
corresponding results are displayed in Fig. 5, where both
BitAcc and TPR@0.01FPR values decrease as the attack intensity increases. However, it is found that the TPR@0.01FPR
values are higher than 0.7000 even if all the tested attacks
are at the maximum level. Moreover, under these tested attack
intensities, most of the BitAcc values are above 0.7400. These
findings clearly demonstrate that the proposed method, which
embeds the watermark into the initial latent space, offers
sufficient resilience against various levels of image processing
attacks.
In addition to the traditional image processing attacks
discussed above, a recent study [45] has highlighted the
increasing importance of developing watermarking methods
that can withstand the generative attacks. These attacks, typically implemented through generative models, aim to remove
watermarks by maintaining semantic fidelity while iteratively
injecting noise and reconstructing images to recover visually
similar but watermark-free versions. To comprehensively evaluate the robustness of the proposed watermarking scheme,
three types of generative attacks are applied, including two
VAE-based methods (Bmshj18 [46], Cheng20 [47]) and one
diffusion-based method (Zhao23 [48]). The corresponding
results, showing both BitAcc and TPR@0.01FPR values for
a 48-bit watermark on the Stable-Diffusion-Prompts dataset,
are presented in Fig. 6. It can be found that the extraction
performance gradually decreases with increasing attack intensity. Nevertheless, all the BitAcc values remain above 0.7240,
indicating that the watermark stability is largely preserved even
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
LUO et al.: FLEXIBLE AND LIGHTWEIGHT WATERMARKING FRAMEWORK FOR SDMs 13959
Fig. 6. BitAcc and TPR@0.01FPR values of the proposed watermarking scheme on the 48-bit embedded watermark and the Stable-Diffusion-Prompts dataset
under three types of generative attacks. (a) VAE-based attack (Bmshj18 [46]), (b) VAE-based attack (Cheng20 [47]), and (c) diffusion-based attack (Zhao23
[48]) with varying intensities.
TABLE IV
WATERMARK EXTRACTION PERFORMANCE OF THE PROPOSED SCHEME
UNDER MODEL EDITING ATTACKS ON TWO FINE-TUNED SDMS
under strong generative perturbations. Notably, even under
extreme conditions, such as a VAE attack with a quality rate
of 2 or a diffusion-based attack with 120 denoised steps,
the proposed method maintains stable extraction performance,
which demonstrates excellent robustness. This resilience can
be attributed to the design of embedding the watermark
within the latent space, where the semantic information and
primary latent representations of the reconstructed images
remain largely consistent throughout the iterative corruptionrestoration process and the watermark information is not easily
removed by reconstruction.
A more practical and important scenario involving model
editing attacks is further investigated, where the watermarked
SDM is fine-tuned on a domain-specific dataset to alter
the visual characteristics of its generated images. To evaluate the robustness of the proposed watermarking scheme in
this setting, two fine-tuned SDMs are employed: AnythingV4.0 (an anime-style model based on SDM V1.5) and
SDM V2.1-realistic (a photorealistic model based on SDM
V2.1). The experimental results are summarized in Table IV.
It can be observed that the watermark extraction performance
remains highly stable across both edited models. Specifically,
the BitAcc values stay above 0.7610 and the TPR@0.01FPR
values exceed 0.985 across both fine-tuned variants, indicating
that the designed watermark extractor and decoder maintain
reliable watermark detectability even after the domain-specific
fine-tuning. This robustness can be attributed to the embedding
Fig. 7. Image quality of the generated images after the collusion attacks with
varying numbers of colluders.
of the watermark into the SDM’s initial latent space, which
captures high-level semantic representations that remain consistent across different generation domains. Moreover, the joint
training of the watermark extractor and decoder enables effective decoding from these semantically aligned features rather
than from domain-dependent pixel statistics. Consequently,
the proposed method exhibits strong resistance to model
editing attacks and ensures dependable ownership verification
regardless of downstream model adaptation.
E. Security Analysis
Beyond empirical robustness, a comprehensive evaluation
of a watermarking scheme requires an analysis of its security
against advanced attacks. We therefore evaluate our method’s
resilience against the collusion attacks where multiple colluders average their respective user-specific watermarked initial
latent vectors to cancel out or weaken the watermark signal.
To measure the performance of our scheme under this attack,
we simulate the attack with varying numbers of colluders,
assessing both watermark extraction and image quality. As
shown in Fig. 7, the attack is indeed effective at removing
the watermark, with the BitAcc values consistently hovering
around 0.5, which indicates a random guess. However, this
watermark removal comes at a steep cost to image quality.
The results reveal two critical findings. First, the severity of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
13960 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026
TABLE V
COMPARATIVE RESULTS OF GENERATION QUALITY, EXTRACTION PERFORMANCE WITHOUT ATTACKS, AND COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY AMONG
DIFFERENT WATERMARKING METHODS
quality degradation is inversely proportional to the number
of colluders: attacks with fewer participants yield images of
significantly lower quality. Second, and more importantly, even
under the maximum testing number of colluders, the quality
of the colluded images remains substantially inferior to that
of legitimately watermarked images. These findings prove
that our scheme forces a prohibitive tradeoff on attackers.
While they can successfully disrupt the watermark, the process
irreparably damages the image, rendering it perceptually poor
and semantically inconsistent. This makes the collusion attacks
pragmatically ineffective, confirming the security of the watermarking method, which injects the watermark information into
the latent space.
A critical aspect of any watermarking system’s security
is its resilience to the potential leakage of keys. While
our system does not use a traditional cryptographic key,
the watermark extractor Dext functions as the private key.
Comprising a specific architecture and trained weights, Dext
is the only component capable of efficiently extracting the
watermark message from the images. Therefore, its security is
paramount. An attack scene is considered, where the attacker
has obtained one or more public watermarked images and aims
to recover the embedded message without access to Dext. Then,
the security of the watermark hinges on the computational
intractability of reversing the generative process. The entire
pipeline, which maps a low-dimensional binary message to a
high-dimensional image, acts as a complex one-way function.
Reversing this process is computationally infeasible, meaning
that the watermark is computationally secure within the public
image. However, the security of the entire system is ultimately contingent upon protecting Dext. While the embedded
watermark is secure against external attacks, its confidentiality is only guaranteed if the extractor remains confidential,
accessible solely to the authorized regulatory department for
verification. In the event that the extractor Dext is to be leaked,
the scheme’s security would be fundamentally compromised.
An attacker possessing Dext would gain the ability to read
the watermark from any corresponding image, thereby nullifying its confidentiality. This underscores that the protection
of the extractor is the cornerstone of the system’s security
architecture. To further fortify the extractor, we can implement
a cryptographic control: requiring a unique, time-sensitive
session key for each verification. This acts as a second factor of
authentication, rendering a stolen, static extractor file useless
on its own.
F. Comparative Experiments
Existing initial-noise-modification-based SDM watermarking schemes extract the watermark information by transforming the watermarked generated image into the latent vector of
the watermark, leveraging the VAE encoder and the DDIM
inversion process. Examples of such schemes include TreeRing [15], Gaussian shading [16], and DiffuseTrace [17].
In contrast, the proposed SDM watermarking in this article,
which is based on the designed watermark extractor, recovers
the watermarked latent vector and the watermark decoder to
decode the watermark information without the use of the
DDIM inversion process.
In practical application scenarios, the shorter the watermark
extraction time, the more applicable the proposed watermarking method becomes. To evaluate this aspect, the comparative
experiments are conducted considering the watermark extraction time and the parameter size of the watermark extractor
module, and the obtained results are depicted in Table V. All
comparative schemes, except for Tree-Ring, due to design limitations, embed a watermark capacity of 48 bits. The extraction
time is calculated based on the process from the watermarked
generated images and the recovered watermarked latent vector
fairly. For each scheme, 1000 images are generated by the
watermarked SDMs, and the average time is obtained to
represent the extraction time. It is evident that the extraction
time associated with the proposed watermarking scheme is
considerably reduced, and the parameters related to the watermark extractor module are quite low. Other schemes extract the
watermark information based on the DDIM inversion module,
which is equivalent to the diffusion model as a watermark
extractor. Although this type of design concept can utilize the
reversible nature of DDIM inversion to extract watermarks, it
inevitably leads to a relatively large model size and a longer
running time. Conversely, our designed watermark extractor
based on the Transformer and MLP framework outperforms
these comparative watermarking schemes in terms of computational efficiency.
To further validate the architectural advantages of our
designed watermark extractor, a ResNet18-based watermark
extractor is additionally implemented and trained to realize the
same watermark extraction task. Both models are trained under
identical settings, using the same number of watermarked
images and loss objectives, to ensure fair comparison. The
corresponding results on the extraction performance and the
extraction time are shown in Table V. Although the extraction
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
LUO et al.: FLEXIBLE AND LIGHTWEIGHT WATERMARKING FRAMEWORK FOR SDMs 13961
TABLE VI
COMPARATIVE RESULTS ON ROBUSTNESS EVALUATION AGAINST FIXED DEGREE IMAGE PROCESSING ATTACKS (BITACC/TPR@0.01FPR)
time of the ResNet18-based watermark extractor is slightly
shorter, it requires a larger number of parameters and yields
a lower BitAcc value. In contrast, our adopted watermark
extractor, based on the Transformer and MLP architecture,
achieves higher extraction accuracy with a smaller parameter
size, despite a slightly longer extraction time. This performance gain can be attributed to the architectural strengths
of the Transformer framework. Unlike convolutional networks
such as the tested ResNet18, which rely on localized receptive
fields and fixed kernel operations, the Transformer employs
self-attention mechanisms that enable dynamic, global feature
aggregation. This capability is particularly advantageous in
recovering the watermarked latent vector from the generated
image, where the embedded watermark may induce subtle,
nonlocal perturbations across spatial locations and feature
dimensions in the latent space. By modeling long-range
dependencies and global context, the Transformer is more
effective at capturing these dispersed watermark signals, which
might be overlooked by purely convolutional architectures.
Moreover, the inclusion of the MLP head further improves
the extractor module’s nonlinear representational capacity,
allowing it to refine the recovered latent features into a more
accurate watermarked representation in the latent space. This
results in a more precise input for the subsequent watermark
decoder, thereby improving the overall extraction performance.
The Transformer and MLP architecture thus offers a flexible
and expressive recovery pipeline that can better capture the
distributional changes induced by the watermark during the
generation process of SDM. This hierarchical feature refinement ensures that the extracted latent vector is more closely
aligned with the true watermarked distribution, which facilitates more accurate decoding in the downstream watermark
decoder. Thus, our method strikes a better balance between
model size and extraction reliability, making it more suitable
for lightweight deployment scenarios where watermark extraction accuracy and parameter efficiency are prioritized.
Furthermore, the comparative experimental results on
fidelity and watermark extraction are displayed in Table V.
The results indicate that the designed watermarking scheme
has a relatively minor impact on the original SDM model.
In terms of fidelity, it is on par with Gaussian shading [16]
and DiffuseTrace [17], both of which maintain the Gaussian
distribution when injecting the watermark into the initial noise
vector. What is more, the TPR@0.01FPR value is 0.999,
which performs well in the identification task. Although the
BitAcc value of 0.8125 is lower than 0.9811, the proposed
watermarking scheme has distinct advantages. It features a
significantly shorter watermark extraction time and employs a
flexible watermark extractor module that can directly recover
the watermark information from the detected watermarked
image, outperforming the comparative schemes. Moreover, the
BitAcc value is still acceptable for fulfilling the traceability
task. Table VI represents the comparative test results on the
destructive attacks and constructive attack in the fixed degrees.
For the average value in the destructive attacks, it can be
observed that the magnitude of the decrease in the BitAcc
value of the proposed scheme is about 0.04, which is less
than 0.06 of DiffuseTrace [17]. This means that the designed
watermark extractor module with the watermark decoder performs robustly enough to defend against destructive attacks
and maintains the ability of the watermark extraction process.
G. Performance of Watermark Extractor in the IoT
Deployment
To precisely assess our watermark extractor’s performance in a multiple IoT devices concurrence scenario,
an industry-grade discrete-event simulation system is constructed. The watermark extraction service is deployed on a
Gunicorn+FastAPI server stack with four worker processes.
Client-side behavior is simulated using the Locust framework,
emulating a varying number of concurrent IoT devices whose
request arrivals follow a Poisson process to realistically model
random event streams. To mitigate potential I/O bottlenecks
during testing, each virtual device requests verification for
watermarked images randomly selected from a pre-generated
pool of 10 000. The average BitAcc value, system throughput
(images/s), P95 latency, and P99 latency are measured across
various concurrence levels under the 48-bit watermark length.
The results, illustrated in Fig. 8, are compelling: even under the
tested highest load of 1200 concurrent IoT devices, the system
maintained both the P99 latency and the P99 latency under
500 ms. Furthermore, the average BitAcc value is 0.8096,
which aligns with the original level. The system achieves a
throughput of 500 images/s, demonstrating its capability to
handle large-scale, real-time IoT verification tasks.
Recognizing that practical applications have varying data
capacity requirements, we evaluate the system’s performance
across three distinct watermark lengths (16, 24, and 48 bits)
under a sustained load of 500 concurrent IoT devices.
Throughout these tests, the BitAcc values remain at a consistent level as the ones in Table I. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
13962 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 7, 1 APRIL 2026
Fig. 8. Performance of the watermark extractor under different numbers of
IoT devices concurrence.
Fig. 9. Performance of the watermark extractor under various watermark
lengths in the IoT scenario.
increase in watermark length has a negligible impact on extraction latency and throughput. This is because our extractor
model is a single forward-pass process, and its computational
complexity is mainly independent of the output bit length. This
characteristic demonstrates our solution’s excellent flexibility,
which allows users to flexibly choose the required watermark
capacity for their specific application without incurring a
performance penalty.
H. Ablation Study
In this section, three key factors involved in the generation
process for SDM are explored, including the SDM versions,
the inference steps, and the guidance scales. We then quantitatively analyze their impacts on the performance of both the
watermark embedding and watermark extraction phases.
1) SDM Versions: The adopted SDM version may vary and
be updated with technological advancements. In this section,
the proposed SDM watermarking scheme is evaluated on
SDM V1.4, V1.5, and V2.0, which are not used during the
training phase, and the corresponding results are displayed in
Table VII. The fidelity of the watermarked image and the effectiveness of watermark extraction are still excellent. It means
that this trained watermark extractor exhibits strong generalization capabilities across various SDM V1/V2 variants.
2) Inference Steps: To assess the influence of inference
steps, the numbers are adjusted to 10 and 50. Table VIII
illustrates the corresponding experimental results. As can be
TABLE VII
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT SDM VERSIONS
TABLE VIII
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT INFERENCE STEPS
TABLE IX
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT GUIDANCE SCALES
observed, an increase of the inference steps can enhance the
quality of the watermarked images in terms of the NIQE
value. Although the performance of the method has slightly
decreased in PIQE value, it does not have a detrimental effect
on the watermark extraction.
3) Guidance Scales: Table IX represents the corresponding generation quality and watermark extraction performance
under different guidance scales. With the increase in the guidance scale, the quality of the watermarked images decreases
in terms of PIQE value, but their semantic consistency is
enhanced. What is more, the ability to extract watermarks
is well-maintained. It indicates that the guidance scale has
a slight impact on the generation quality but does not affect
the watermark extraction quality.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteka PWr. Downloaded on April 14,2026 at 07:43:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
LUO et al.: FLEXIBLE AND LIGHTWEIGHT WATERMARKING FRAMEWORK FOR SDMs 13963
V. CONCLUSION
Based on the initial-noise-modification watermarking strategy, a lightweight watermark extractor module built upon the
Transformer and MLP framework is specifically designed to
straightforwardly recover watermark information from generated images without relying on the DDIM inversion step.
By eliminating the dependence on the original SDM, the
proposed architecture significantly improves deployment flexibility, particularly in scenarios where the identical diffusion
model may not be accessible when extracting the watermark.
What is more, the watermark extractor and decoder are
jointly performed on the watermarked image to retrieve the
embedded watermark. Experimental results confirm the effectiveness in ensuring high visual quality of generated images
while enabling reliable watermark extraction for robust copyright verification and user traceability. Although the proposed
method exhibits strong robustness against diverse attacks,
it remains less effective under adversarial perturbations. In
future work, we aim to enhance the method’s capabilities on
two fronts: first, by improving its resistance to adversarial
perturbations through robust training strategies, and second,
by investigating its universality across models with different
architectural backbones.
